Good morning.
Welcome to the 2005 printing session.
I'm Richard Blanchard.
I am the engineering
manager for printing.
So I like to start these sessions
always with a thank you because so
much of printing depends upon two
different groups of developers.
It depends upon the application
developers on the one hand
and the printer driver
developers on the other hand.
We're lucky enough to have thousands
and thousands of applications that
generate really beautiful output on
Mac OS X through the printing system,
so thank you to all the
application drivers.
And on the other hand,
we also support thousands
of printer models,
so thank you to all the printer vendors
and the people writing printer drivers.
It's actually quite a luxury to have
gigabytes of drivers and actually have to
worry about how we're going to get them
all on a disk and get them to our users.
So it's a problem, but it's kind of the
problem you'd want to have.
So what does the print system do?
We sit here in the middle of
these two mountains of code
written by the application writers
and the printer driver writers.
And we mediate.
That's really what the print system does.
The applications know what code
or what they want to render.
They give that to us in the print system.
We do some handling of it,
eventually hand it to the printer driver,
which gets it to the printer.
And so we do this mediation.
And as we go forward,
more and more of this mediation
has turned out to be on our end,
hey, my application, you know,
application 2406,
doesn't print with printer driver 7.0.
And we end up having
to go figure out why.
And then once you start
throwing in all the different
communications protocols we support,
that combinations,
those combinations grow very quickly.
And we have to come up with some way
to try and handle those problems.
So the goal today is to
was to talk about ways we
can handle those problems.
And I think the basis for the problem
is the fact that the application
writers live in a completely different
world than the printer driver writers.
The application writers
actually have it pretty good.
You're in user space.
You're in a login context.
You get to access all
of the user's files.
You have all the right permissions.
You have all of Cocoa to
make your life easy.
It's pretty good over there.
On the other side,
you have the printer driver writers,
and they're in a different world.
They live and run inside
of a boot context.
They never get to run as the user.
They run as the LP user,
or if they need special resources,
as the root user.
So they're separated, really,
from the user and have to run
in this special environment.
And they don't necessarily always
understand the travails that the
application writers have to go through
in order to generate proper output.
And conversely,
the application writers don't
always think about what the
printer driver problems might be.
So the goal today was to give a
tour of the printing system to
try and bring those two worlds a
little closer together to increase
the understanding and hopefully,
get applications that work
with more printer drivers,
have fewer problems,
and printer drivers that
understand the kind of output the
applications might be generating.
So along the way of that tour,
and we haven't done that
tour for a couple years now,
really since we switched over to CUPS,
which was pre-Jaguar, along the way,
I want to stop out and point
out developer opportunities
and some new Tiger features.
One of the big pluses today, last year,
I was able to announce that
we had changed 70% of the
print system in the print UI.
The year before that,
we had changed 70% of this print system,
in the print server,
and while the mathematics was
probably a little questionable,
it was pretty scary, but this year,
since we switched processors,
we didn't have to really change
big changes in the print system,
so that was a plus.
So for this tour, we're going to start on
the printer driver side.
And that really is CUPS,
Common Unix Print System.
That's an open-source piece of
software we get from the great
folks at Easy Software Products.
Michael Sweet, if you know him,
I'm sure he's here today.
We work with them very closely.
That is our print system.
It's that open-source piece of software.
Richard Blazchard In Tiger,
we're using 1.1.23.
So we get that from
Easy Software Products.
We add a couple things into it.
We try and feed those changes back.
Some of them are pretty Apple-specific,
so not all of them go back.
Richard Blazchard For Tiger,
some of the things we
added was Bonjour support.
A lot of people thought or have
thought that inside of CUPS,
we do printer sharing via Bonjour,
and we haven't in the past.
It was just sort of a little sleight
of hand people thought we did.
Richard Blazchard So now in Tiger,
the CUPS daemon will actually
publish shared printers via Bonjour.
Richard Blazchard Richard Blazchard So if
you have a Bonjour client out there,
maybe Bonjour for
Windows or a Linux client,
they can actually do Bonjour lookups and
find the cues that are shared from Tiger.
Richard Blazchard We also added
something called Lazy CUPS instantiation
or Lazy CUPS launching.
The reason behind this was,
and this somewhat pains me to say it,
is not all our users actually print.
Richard Blazchard And so the
idea that there was this print
daemon sort of always there and
waiting for the user to print,
and maybe they never did,
was problematic,
and especially if you're running
something like a web server.
Richard Blazchard You really
never needed the print server.
Richard Blazchard So what we did,
now when CUPS starts up,
that daemon starts up at boot time,
it takes a look to see if there
are any jobs ready to print.
Richard Blazchard And if there are, well,
then it continues on
with its initialization,
and it stays running.
Richard Blazchard If there
aren't any jobs to print,
then it looks to see if it's
supposed to be sharing printers,
and if it is, it continues launching
and it shares printers.
Richard Blazchard But if it
doesn't have any jobs to print,
and it's not sharing any printers,
it registers with the
Mach bootstrap server and it quits.
Richard Blazchard And that daemon's
gone until the user actually does
something with the print system.
Richard Blazchard So they drop
a print dialog or they go to the
command line and do an LP command
line or something like that.
Richard Blazchard I guess one quick note,
for people who are used to
going to the CUPS web interface,
that's not enough to
actually start up the daemon.
Richard Blazchard So you
have to do something else,
like go to the command line
and give an LP command,
and then the web interface will come up.
Richard Blazchard So anyway,
those are a couple of the changes we
made on top of CUPS 1.1.23 and Tiger.
Richard Blazchard Again,
this is all open source.
We keep it on our Darwin repository.
Richard Blazchard
We push that every night,
so you can always see what we're doing.
Richard Blazchard If you
go to CVS and check it out,
you'll see what we're doing.
Richard Blazchard That's
what we did the other day.
Richard Blazchard If anybody
was paying attention,
they might have seen some
interesting Endian issues being
checked in over the last few weeks.
So we have this thing CUPS,
and what is CUPS?
Well, it's a print server.
In particular, it's an internet
printing protocol server.
It's responsible for
publishing shared printers,
finding shared printers.
It's got the web
interface we talked about.
Queues jobs, and it starts print jobs.
So we're going to look
at that a little bit.
How does it share printers?
Well,
it's got a bunch of different methods,
especially in Tiger.
CUPS has always shared printers via UDP.
It sends out these UDP broadcasts
on the subnet so that other
CUPS daemons can see it.
And so that still exists in Tiger,
and it's the same as it was
in 10.3 and 10.2 before it.
We've added Bonjour we talked about.
We also integrate with Samba.
So if the user turns on
Windows printer sharing,
we use Samba to publish
our print queues via SMB.
So that's how we share them.
How do we take jobs in?
Well, pretty much via IPP,
the internet printing protocol.
That's the type of queues that get
published via the UDP broadcast.
That's the type of queues that
get published via Bonjour.
For SMB, obviously it's SMB that the
jobs are going to come in.
And we also take LPD jobs.
And while we don't have
any publishing of them,
if you know the host name or
the IP address of a Mac and
you know the queue name,
you can actually print to it via LPD.
So we have a pretty broad way
of publishing and actually
accessing printers on Tiger.
The way we find shared printers,
the daemon's listening
for these UDP broadcasts,
and as they come in from
another CUPS server,
we take that information
and we build a queue.
So the UDPs work just
as they always have,
and it's automatic.
In Tiger,
we have lots of different ways in the
user interface that users can also
add these shared printers via Bonjour,
SMB, or LPD, and even other words,
and that's extensible.
So again,
basic print server functionality.
You can queue jobs with CUPS.
CUPS will support
prioritization and scheduling.
And it has printer pools.
And I always like talking about printer
pools because I think they're very cool.
And I never find enough
people who actually use them.
The idea with the printer pool is
if you have multiple print queues,
you can, from our user interface,
wrap them up into one queue
that gets presented to the user.
And the example I always use is
the photographer who's got his
six Raster printers and he's
in a hurry to get his job done,
needs to print out 20, 30 slides.
You can make one of these pools--
CUPS calls them classes-- print to it.
And then the jobs will be dispatched
to the printers as they're available.
And that's all just part of CUPS.
And we put a little UI on top of that.
All right, so now we'll start getting
to the more interesting part.
How does CUPS actually work?
Because it's a print server,
at some point we actually have to print.
And CUPS creates a chain of
processes when it needs to print,
and these are broken down into filters,
drivers, and backends.
And this chain of processes
is linked together so that
at the head of the chain,
there's a file input
to the first process,
and then the output from that
first process is piped into
the standard end and the next,
his standard out to standard end,
eventually all the way
until it gets to a printer.
And so we're going to look at that and
see some developer opportunities for you,
maybe.
All right, so here's a picture of
the print processes.
What do the filter processes do?
Well, they're MIME converters.
They convert from one file
type to another file type.
That's all they do.
They're very specialized,
and they're very specific,
and they're running there.
By definition, the very last filter in
the chain is the driver,
and his job is to make
printer-ready output.
So he takes the last
conversion of filters,
usually wraps that up in
some printer commands,
and then will send that along
again to his standard output,
which is the standard
output to a back end.
[Transcript missing]
So there's this complicated--
complicated is the wrong word.
Never want to say complicated
in front of developers.
There is this chain of
processes that go on.
And because of the chain and
sort of the shared assignment,
some of these pieces
are written by Apple,
some are by the printer vendors.
Sometimes things go wrong.
We'll say that things only go wrong,
really, when you're in development,
and we'll ignore the rest.
But when you're in development and
you're writing your application and
you're having problems printing,
or if you're writing your printer
driver and things aren't going right,
I wanted to give you a
pointer to where to go.
And this is really very simple.
You go look in var log CUPS error log.
And the standard error
from all those processes,
when they're linked together,
all get piped together.
It goes into CUPS.
CUPS looks at its CUPSd.com file to
see what the error log level should be,
and it writes out corresponding
information into this log file.
So you can go look at it.
You look at it normally
without making any changes,
you'll see lots of informational pieces.
But if you go into it
and you edit and you say,
hey, log level is an info.
It's log level debug,
because I'm a developer.
You'll now get lots of interesting
pieces of information in there.
And what's more,
if you're writing a driver and
you put some fprintfs to standard
error to kind of let yourself
know what your driver's doing,
those will all show up in the log and
things will be a lot less mysterious.
So that's where to go
when things go wrong.
After you make those changes,
make sure you restart CUPS.
It's a server.
It needs to be told to HUP itself.
And of course,
this is really the best place.
I've got stacks of these
still in my office.
If anybody comes into my office ever,
and this has been about three years,
and asks me a question about cups,
I give them the nickel answer and
I toss them the book and I say,
come back when you know.
So Michael Sweet's book, it's terrific.
I always plug it.
Richard Blaencharnd So what are you
going to see in the log when you go look?
This is some informational pieces,
and I use this as an example
because it really hammers home the
idea of this chain of processes.
Here's a job.
It happens to be PDF going to
a PostScript printer over LPD.
And if you look in the log,
it'll tell you, hey,
for this job number 18,
I had to start three processes.
One, CG, PDF to PostScript,
the Apple-supplied converter
from PDF to PostScript.
The second filter,
which is because it's the last filter
in the chain we call the driver,
is the PostScript to PostScript.
Richard Blaencharnd Richard Blaencharnd
So, where are the developer
opportunities here?
Well, they're the MIME filters.
Those are independent of the driver.
You can write a MIME filter for
your particular file type without
ever writing a printer driver
without being a printer vendor.
So, there's some opportunity there.
For the driver, that last filter,
that's pretty much you're going
to be a printer developer.
You're going to be an OEM.
But there are alternate
drivers out there,
alternative drivers out there.
GIMP prints one.
We ship that.
There's OmniPrint.
There's just tons of them.
And so,
if you are interested in one of those
projects and want to bring them over,
there's some good opportunity there.
And lastly, the back ends.
The black ends are, again,
independent of the driver.
All they do is do communications.
And so,
maybe you decided you actually want
to generate PostScript from an output,
but you want to FTP it somewhere
because that's important to
the workflow for your customer.
You write this very simple
tool to do FTP on the back end.
And it can be written in C.
It can be written in Python.
You can do this in a Bash script.
It's just very simple to do.
And again, it's independent of all
the drivers in front of it.
So filters.
We talked about filters a little bit.
They convert from one
MIME type to another.
If you create a filter on our
system and install it correctly,
some magical things start to happen.
All of a sudden, that file type,
that MIME type, can be dragged on to,
we call them printer proxies.
They're desktop printers,
but they don't always
live on the desktop.
So anyway,
printer proxy is the funny name for them.
But you can drag on to the
little icon of your printer,
and we will directly submit that
into the print system without
having to launch the application.
So that's drag-and-drop printing,
direct support if you do that.
So filters.
We also have a direct printing API that
allows applications to directly submit
files into the print system without
going through a rendering stage,
say, in Quartz.
So if you do a filter,
the direct printing API will all
of a sudden support that file type.
So what does it take to write a filter?
It's incredibly easy.
It's just a Unix command line tool.
It takes six or seven arguments.
Again, if you're the head of that chain,
you're going to be taking in a file,
so you get seven arguments.
The last argument is the
file you should read.
If you're somewhere in
the middle of the chain,
you get six,
and you read from standard in,
standard out.
You write, again, all your debugging
information is standard error,
so you can go back in that log and
figure out what's going on when
perhaps things don't go right.
Richard Blaanchard So now you've
written this command line filter,
and again, it doesn't have to be in C.
You can write them in
lots of different ways.
How do you get it in the system?
The best way is to go into Etcetera CUPS,
and you add two files.
If you go look in there,
you'll see we have some Apple.type
and Apple.conversions file.
You can add your own with your
own company name on there.
Those two files do two different things.
The types file is how CUPS can
identify the content of a file
if it has to do auto-typing,
whereas the conversions file says, okay,
now that you've got
the content of a file,
you can do auto-typing.
Richard Blaanchard Richard Blaanchard
There's a particular cost-- zero is
usually going to be for your driver
because it's necessary to print.
And here's where my tool lives.
So you add that line.
If that line doesn't exist,
we assume it's a PostScript printer
because there are all these
PostScript PPDs and we run
the PostScript driver for it.
But if you have a PPD,
which we try to wave our hands
for the fact that whatever
that first P stands for,
PostScript maybe,
if you have a PPD for something
that's not PostScript,
you add a line.
That's Star Cup's filter.
Alright,
so when you're writing one of these,
you probably have some different
image formats that are handy for
your printer that are going to be
convenient to get to your printer.
It turns out this Venn Cups Raster format
supports lots of different bit depths
and lots of different byte formats.
So you'll probably find
what you want in there,
and hopefully you'll find that we're
actually generating it correctly
from our filters in front of you.
For Tiger,
we added something that was interesting.
We're always trying to get
better and better output,
so we have 16-bit per color
component raster support in Tiger.
so we can generate...
48-bit RGB, 64-bit CMYK if you want.
And we actually use some of Quartz
functionality if you went on the
Quartz sessions where they can
generate floating point data,
floating point raster data.
So we generate floating point
raster data and then repackage
it up as 16-bit per component.
So it's pretty interesting if you
really have a high-end device,
try that format out and see if you
get any better output for yourself.
Those are the drivers.
Now you go to the back end again,
the communications piece.
Probably no coincidence.
It takes very similar arguments
to the back end-- I'm sorry,
to the drivers and the filters.
It is driven by the device URI.
So every time you build a print queue,
there's a device URI.
The scheme on that device URI will
specify what back end should be run.
So here's a graphical
explanation of that.
Inside of the print queue,
every print queue has
a PPD and a device URI.
The PPD has that star
CUPS filter line we looked at,
and that points to the driver.
The device URI,
if you look at the beginning of that,
the scheme, names the back end.
And so now when you're
building up these processes,
you have the back end,
you know what that is,
you know what the driver is,
you know what the MIME type is
on the print file because you've
auto-typed it from the types files,
and you then put together-- CUPS puts
together a set of filters to get you
from that print file to the driver.
driver and then to the back end.
So again, there are lots of opportunities
here in this back end,
in this printer driver
world for print vendors,
writing drivers, but really for anybody
for filters and back ends.
And it's probably worth,
if you're an application vendor,
try writing a filter just to get
a little appreciation of what the
printer driver guys have to live
with over in that different world.
So you should probably
take a look at that.
So the printer driver guys live
over in that different world.
One of the parts of that different world
that cups context is they have no UI.
They can't present UI over there.
There's maybe not even a user logged in.
There's definitely a need, however,
for a printer driver to
put up a user interface.
They really want to be in a print dialog.
And that's a problem because the print
dialog is definitely happening at a
completely different time than printing.
It may be off by only a couple seconds.
But it could be off by more because
you can schedule jobs so the user,
when they printed one, said, hey,
print that tomorrow.
And by the time it ends
up going to the driver,
it's a completely different day from when
the UI and the actual printer driver ran.
So they're separated in time.
They're separated in users,
as we talked about.
When that UI runs,
you're logged in as the user.
There's actually a person there,
and you have that permission for the UI.
But by the time the
printer driver gets it,
it's a completely different user.
It's this LP user.
So they can't access files.
We get some of our first time
printer driver writers trying to,
in their UI,
write preferences that they then
read back from their printer driver.
And you can't do it because the
file permissions prevent that.
And then to really make
things complicated,
the UI and the driver might be
on completely different machines.
If you're printing to a shared printer,
the UI is taking place
over here on machine A.
Machine B is actually where
the driver's going to run.
So forget the permissions problem.
You're not even on the same drive.
You're not going to get any information
across there unless you do it correctly.
How do these people do this correctly?
How do you get a printer
driver to get UI up?
We have these things
called print drivers.
print dialog extensions.
If you have a PPD-- and you must
have a PPD in order to write
a driver-- you can do nothing.
And we will go into the
PPD and look for the open UI,
close UI keywords,
and we will build a user
interface for your driver.
We'll just do that straight up.
And it comes under the
printer features panel.
It's about what you'd expect, I hope,
from a dynamic UI.
It's not going to knock anybody
over with its beautifulness,
but it is functional.
So we'll do that,
and that's no work for you.
And again,
it solves all those problems we
just talked about-- different
users and different times.
But people really want to write UI.
They want to write their own UI.
I mean, that's the fun part,
especially if you're a
printer driver writer,
right?
That's the only chance you
get to interact with the user.
So you can take advantage of it.
So if you write one of these
print dialog extensions,
there's a couple things you
really need to keep in mind.
One, hey, all of a sudden you are now
running with the user's ID,
so permissions are different from
what your driver's going to be.
We talked about that.
You can crash the app.
If you crash your printer driver,
CUPS handles that and the
user will get an error.
But nothing bad really happens.
If your driver extension,
your print dialog extension crashes,
the user's going to see that
app crash from under them and
they're not going to be happy.
Generally, they're not happy with Apple.
And it's only when we go
look at the logs and go,
well, wait a minute,
this little print driver
extension was crashing.
It wasn't us.
But that's going to happen.
And then the other one,
going again back to Monday,
is if you're running as
a print dialog extension,
you have to be the same
architecture as the application.
There's no translation
happening within an application.
So if that application's
running PowerPC code,
you need PowerPC print dialog extension.
If they're running x86 code,
you need x86 print dialog extension.
So whereas for the print drivers,
we can make lots of magic happen and
there's all this intermixing of code,
we can't do that with inside
of an application and we don't.
So you need to get busy and compile
your print dialog extensions
with these universal binaries.
I've said that.
That was a requirement from Steve Jobs.
I had to say that every session.
Universal.
So how do you point to this?
You go into your PPD and you
add this Apple Dialog extension.
Say, hey, here's where my bundle is.
This is the bundle for the
printer supported by this PPD.
This is where it is.
And for Tiger,
we added the ability to write these
print dialog extensions in Cocoa.
So it's a lot easier to do
now than it has been before.
We took care of a lot of the
problems that were in the old API,
and it's pretty clean right now.
The idea is your main class
inside of that bundle implements
this PDE panels is for type.
And we will come along and
instantiate your bundle for
the right printer and say,
hey,
we're bringing up the page setup dialog,
or we're bringing up the print
dialog-- that's the type.
Please give us all the
panels you want us to show.
And so you return this array of panels.
And if you've seen some
of the printer drivers,
it can be a pretty big array.
Sometimes they add a lot of stuff.
That instance of PDE panels,
they implement this informal protocol,
and we will make calls into it.
And in particular,
we'll ask for the view.
We'll get the view from this
Cocoa print dialog extension,
and we will embed it
inside of the print dialog.
And it will look like
it's supposed to be there.
And it is.
We'll also give you
lots of notifications.
Hey, we're going to show you,
or we're going to hide you.
Is that OK?
And then the two most important pieces,
we'll tell you when we need you to take
the values from your UI and store them.
And when we want you to take the stored
values and present them up in your UI.
You're not going to get very
far unless you have some context
when you're writing this.
So we have a callback into the
print system that you can make from
your Cocoa print dialog extensions.
And you can ask the print system
for the print session that tells
you how the user's job's going.
You can get the print settings.
It's how it's going to print.
Get the page format, how it's formatted.
The current printer that's
targeted in the PPD file.
And there's some other callbacks,
but that set will let you
present your UI properly.
So what I didn't mention
that you can get,
and you can, is actually a job ticket.
And this is kind of a
quick blast to the past.
In the old Tioga architecture
for printer drivers,
we had the split of the
way settings were grabbed.
If you were an application,
you used PM print settings.
That was there.
If you were a driver,
you used job tickets.
And the problem was we ended
up with these two sets of APIs,
and they didn't really
cover each other very well.
So we've been making steady progress
towards phasing out access really to
the job tickets and asking everybody
to go through the print settings.
So if you're writing one of these
new Cocoa print dialog extensions,
you can get either,
and they represent the same data.
We're going to ask that you get the print
settings because that's what we want.
We want applications and printer
drivers to share the same API,
but you can get both.
So if you're used to one or
you're porting over code,
it shouldn't be a problem.
We're going to be making this
sample available through DTS.
This is a very simple print
dialog extension written in Cocoa,
and all it does is when
it's told to show its UI,
it gets all the settings from
all the PDEs and shows them.
Kind of a helpful debugging thing.
So if you're writing your PDE and
the user's hitting a button and
it's not being set properly,
you can look here to see if
you're actually getting it
into the print settings itself.
So that'll be coming probably
in the next couple weeks.
All right, so the PPD points to your
print dialog extensions,
but it can point to lots of
other stuff if you're making one.
You can add a pointer to an icon,
and that's how you get the
icons on the desktop printers,
a printer utility, and new in Tiger,
you can add a pointer to a low-ink tool,
so we can actually find out the
ink levels for your printer.
And so I want to talk
briefly about how that works.
None of the printer drivers actually
have low-ink tools right now,
so what we have in Tiger is an
SNMP query for network printers.
So if you just have a network
printer that supports SNMP,
we will, when we need to,
query the printer,
figure out its ink levels,
and we have a new panel that'll
show the ink supplies so you
can go see what your levels are.
You can try that out.
The ink tools are just
command line tools,
much like the filters.
If you want to see how ours works,
here's the path to it.
You give it the printer ID,
and it'll go make the query,
dump a bunch of
XML representation back to you,
and you can look at it.
And you can use that to judge how,
if you're writing your own,
maybe the data should be formatted.
If you do write your own,
and it's not working properly,
we have this default that you can
set that will cause us to write
lots of information out to console
that'll explain what we thought was
wrong with the XML you generated.
So we use it to check for load
supplies and to show supply levels.
We have an SNMP ink tool,
and you can override it.
If ours isn't working the way you want,
even for your network SNMP printer,
you can override it.
If you have a USB device,
you can put yours also in.
It generates this XML.
It's a top-level dictionary
with a supplies table.
Inside that supplies table is
an array of supply dictionaries.
Each one describes a
supply on the printer.
There are required keys that need
to be in that to describe each one.
It's the class.
Is this a consumable or
something that's being filled?
So is it a waste bucket or is it
maybe a piece of toner or ink?
A description that we
can show to the user,
the max capacity,
and the supply level capacity so
we can draw our little bar charts.
There are optionals.
You can tell us the type.
Is it ink?
Is it toner?
Is it fuser?
You can tell us the unit that
your measurements are in.
They're in milliliters.
You can give us a color
to draw the charts in,
and you can give us a part number.
All right,
so we use SNMP again for our ink tool,
but we added some more
SNMP support inside of Tiger.
In particular, we wanted,
when the user set up a network
printer that wasn't using AppleTalk,
we wanted to try and get closer
to the AppleTalk experience
of doing the auto setup.
So we have an SNMP set of
SNMP queries that are in there.
It'll go get the products,
some other standard stuff,
but the PPDs can be augmented
with information that link
back the SNMP queries back to
the typical PPD information.
So in particular,
these question OID strings say, hey,
if you want to know what the level
of or what the state of tray three,
that installable option is,
here's the SNMP object number.
You should go query.
They're always very long.
And if it comes back and says installed,
well, then you should treat
it as if that is true,
that is installed.
And so you can add these
OID queries into a PPD,
and all of a sudden we get much more like
AppleTalk auto setup of network printer,
even if they're LPD or IPP,
which traditionally don't work.
All right,
so that's the printer driver world.
We're now going to move over
onto the application world
and see how we can do there.
So there's the Cocoa printing API.
Not going to say a lot about
the Cocoa printing API.
I hate to say it, but it just works.
Generally, all you need to do is
make an NSPrint operation.
You give it the view that's
going to be drawing the document,
and then you invoke it.
And you invoke it on a window so the
sheet drops on the window and say,
hey, tell me when it's done.
And that's Cocoa printing
at the top level.
We get a lot of requests for people
who then want to add an accessory view.
This is the Cocoa equivalent
to our print dialog extensions.
And they want to add that.
And again, that's very simple.
You get this print operation.
You say set accessory view.
You give it a view,
and that'll then end up in the
print dialog again with all of the
different pieces from the print
system and the printer driver,
all these different panels
all looped together.
There are a couple limitations
on the accessory panels,
and people have complained
about this over time.
And I expect the Cocoa team
will address them,
although I'm in no
hurry for them to do so.
There's only one print panel
or one accessory view that
can be really added at a time.
And there's no access to
the underlying Carbon data.
That latter one is something
I do want them to fix.
The first one we're going to
talk about here in a little bit.
So I'm going to make the
statement that ideally,
your Carbon application will never add
an accessory view to the print dialog.
My stance is always that
you have an application,
you have menus, you have dialogs,
you've got lots of
user interface widgets.
Why would you want to hide something
up inside this modal print dialog?
And that brings me to sort
of my Don Quixote moment.
This is, I've been failing inside of
Apple at this for a while,
and so now I'm going to
fail in front of all of you.
This is,
there was this thing 10 years ago, 15,
20 years ago, called WYSIWYG.
And the idea was, hey,
the user would actually see on screen,
in their view, what it was going to look
like when they printed.
And the first challenge is,
if you have PowerBooks,
go find an application that
actually does this today.
There are some.
That's good.
But people, it's not even lazy.
There's just sort of this new
model where they're showing the
data in more interesting ways,
but then they never give the user a
way inside of that view to see what
the printed data is going to look like.
And of course, this hurts me deeply as
somebody who prints a lot,
even if it's just test pages.
So the idea is,
if you have things you're trying
to put in this accessory view,
think about not doing it there.
Let the user reformat the page and
edit the data live in that print view.
Again, this is a printer guy's
view of the world,
but if it's a good format to print,
it's probably a good format to
show on screen to let the user see
the data that's going to come out.
FileMaker.
Well, they were around before this
great shift away from WYSIWYG,
and I really like the way they do this.
I always have, and I use FileMaker a lot.
They have a little widget,
which I've tried to circle here,
and you click on it,
and it shows you what it's going
to look like when it prints.
And while they don't let
you edit that data live,
you hit the other widget
to get a different view,
and now you can edit it
or change the layout,
and you never have to print.
And so if you're just building
a FileMaker database to give
to somebody who they may print,
you know what the output's going to look
like as the creator of this template.
Richard Blaanchard FileMaker.
Well, they're going to print the template
without having to waste paper or,
you know, just fool around with it.
It gives you a very good sense as
a user of what you're creating,
which is printed output in most cases.
So happily,
there are some other good examples.
The Pages folks were terrific at this.
I don't know if there
are any of them here,
but they were just a
great group to work on,
and they really got
this right off the bat.
So there was one windmill
that I was able to take.
Richard Blaanchard FileMaker.
TextEdit.
If you put that in wrap-to-page mode,
which first you have to go find,
but once you get it there,
they actually do a decent job.
Richard Blaanchard FileMaker.
This is one of my favorite
applications just because they took
a function that a dress book has,
Soho labels and envelopes,
and they made it WYSIWYG.
You're printing envelopes.
Well,
they're going to show you what those
envelopes look like before you print it.
Pretty novel.
And, oh, by the way,
they let you actually edit the data on
the envelope because you just noticed
at that point the zip code was wrong.
So it's just a great feel,
and it's the way I think
things should work.
And then iPhoto, not when they print,
but in their book view when
you're buying a book because
you can't print the book out,
right?
You're buying it from some third party.
So they let you actually see what
it looks like and move the pictures
around and show you where it lands up.
So that's one of the things
that's really cool about this.
You can actually see what's on the
page all inside of the user interface,
and it's a great user interface.
And I've actually hacked underneath
the iPhoto folks their book view
into their standard print view so you
could actually do this the right way.
And I'm still trying to
talk them into using it.
So bad examples, again,
this is where life gets
a little depressing.
There's tons of them,
and we could spend the next
hour going through them.
And they're becoming
more and more common.
And part of that, I think,
is just because Carbon makes it
so easy to write an application,
and printing is always
the last thing you write.
If you write an application,
people don't get to that step.
They're just having to do it.
And they're not happy with
the view that they have with
their columns and the tables.
So if you're doing an application
and you really care about this,
and I would hope you do,
there are a couple things
you should look out for.
This is the big warning sign,
and I get so many requests
from this to people at Apple.
If you're trying to put a print
view inside of the print dialog,
you might be going the wrong way.
The user, I would claim, at that point,
once the modal print dialog is dropped,
they see a print view and it's wrong.
They now have to cancel, switch back,
edit the data the way they want it,
print again, drop the sheet again, go,
is that right?
It's just a crazy way to work.
They should be seeing what they're
going to print in their view,
hit the print dialog,
it should say print, you print,
and you get what you expect
because you've already seen it.
So if you're trying to
stuff a preview in there,
stop.
If you're doing it for cosmetic reasons,
iPhoto sort of falls in this category,
that's different.
But please stop and
weigh your options here.
If you're trying to add formatting
options that can't be viewed inside of
your application into the print dialog,
that's probably a problem.
One of the favorite ones
seems to be print footers.
You might ask,
what's going to be in the footers?
Well, the only way to find out is
to go into the print dialog,
go to the accessory view, say, yes,
print footers and print,
and go look and see what that application
decided to put on the footers.
It should be nice if you could
see that inside the view.
So this is my request, and again,
I'm used to disappointment,
so it's OK if you don't do it.
Try not to put print formatting
options into the print dialog.
If it's going to change the layout
of what you're going to print,
show the user before you
get to the print dialog.
The other variant-- and some people think
this sort of appeases me and it doesn't--
is to put up an application print
dialog before the system print dialog.
So you say print,
and then they drop a modal dialog
that gives you all those options,
and then you say print.
That's really no better,
but somehow people think
this is an improvement.
And then just use the power
of your user interface.
Let them format there.
So that's my little battle.
We'll go away from that.
Uh, below the Carbon-- the
Cocoa Printing API,
which, again,
is very simple and has a great
fit to Cocoa applications.
You can really get your
application printing well with
the Cocoa APIs very quickly.
And if you just spend some
time designing that view,
then you can actually
have a great application.
Um, but some people can't use it.
If you're a Carbon application,
you obviously can't use
the Cocoa Printing APIs.
And there are Cocoa applications
that need to access the full
set of the printing APIs,
and so they need to drop down below the
Cocoa level to the Pure Printing APIs.
And what I wanted to do a little
bit was talk about how that works.
[Transcript missing]
If you have a PM page format,
you can get the underlined PM paper.
You can also take the page format
and flatten it in the CFData and
same with the print settings.
So we're going to spend a little
time just looking at the three
important pieces of using this API.
So when you're printing,
you need to know where
you're going to print it,
you're going to know how
and you need to know
how it fits on paper.
So PM Printer, PM Print Settings,
and PM Page Format.
So PM Printer.
So again, first thing you want
to do if you want to,
if you're one of these powerful
applications that's trying to
do something beyond the standard
drop the print dialog and print,
you want to get all the printers.
And PM Server create printer
list will return this array
of PM printer instances.
Now, ideally,
you could actually get this from
any print server on the network.
Right now in Tiger,
you can only get it for the local one.
So you use this constant
KPM server local as the server.
And we'll give you all the
printers on your local machine.
Richard Blazcarz Those printers
come back and they have a
lot of different attributes.
The one that you need to
understand or the two you need to
understand first are the PM printer
ID and the PM printer name.
And this is important if,
even if you're just
using the command line,
but particularly if you're trying to
present a user interface that models
any part of the Apple user interface.
The ID is a unique name for
that queue on that machine.
If you have the ID,
there won't be another queue
on your Mac with that same ID.
And once you get that,
you can get the ID and
you can hand that to CUPS.
You have to turn it into a
C string from the CFString,
but you can do that.
Richard Blazcarz So you can get the
ID and you can hand that to CUPS.
You have to turn it into a
C string from the CFString,
but you can do that.
Richard Blazcarz You can then talk to
the CUPS APIs and get anything you want.
The name,
and this is a Mac OS X subversion
of some CUPS piece.
In CUPS it's called the description.
We take it and we use it as the name.
It's what we show to the
user in the user interface.
Richard Blazcarz And the
difference is the ID has a very
restricted name or character space.
So if you go look in it,
you'll see lots of underscores and
lots of really not very pretty things.
If you look at the name,
we support UTF-8 and
the user can name it,
the queue, anything they want.
Richard Blazcarz The ID is what
you use on the command line.
So you can't go look,
rename your printer, my space printer,
and go to the command line
and print to my printer.
You have to actually go back
and get probably my_printer.
Richard Blazcarz You can see
this in printer setup utility,
this distinction.
There's a text edit field for the name.
So again,
user can change it anytime they want.
But what we call the queue
name is literally what we
call the ID and the API,
and that's going to be constant.
You can't change that.
And here it's the underscore
with the IP address.
So the PM printer has
lots of other attributes.
One of them,
probably the most interesting,
is whether it's remote.
Is this print queue hosted
on your local machine,
or is it a queue that was found
through this discovery mechanism
we talked about at the beginning,
probably UDP broadcast,
and has come in and has been
created for you underneath you?
So PM printer's remote will tell you,
hey,
it's a local queue added by the user,
or it's a remote queue that's
just come in over the network.
You can get the PPD.
You can get the device URI.
You can find out some of the
capabilities of the printer.
In particular, you can find out if it's
the user's default printer.
You can find out if it's
their favorite printer.
Favorites is interesting.
If you're on a large
network with lots of Macs,
and you actually go in and do LPstat-T,
you'll see all the queues
that your system knows about.
And it'll be very large.
When we're at Apple,
it's easily hundreds of shared
queues are on a given machine that
have been found over the network.
But we don't present that to the user.
We don't want the user,
every time they go to the print dialogue,
to see hundreds of-- of printers.
So we have this concept
of per user favorites.
And that is, once the user goes and
selects a shared printer,
it gets marked as a favorite.
And that goes into the user's
working set of printers.
Those are the printers that the user
will see at the top level of the UI.
So PMPrinterIsFavorite is a way
for you to find out if it's one
of that user's preferred printers.
And we have people who are trying to put
up UI for the user to select a printer.
They don't know about this.
They're all of a sudden surprised
when they get user reports that
on some large installation,
they've got these giant pop-ups,
and the user's not very happy.
OK.
So we have a couple of
different ways to do this.
Get the make model.
Get the location.
That's the textual string that
the user has entered to give some
helpful use for shared printers.
And then capabilities.
Can you do duplex?
Can you do shared printers?
So that's PMPrinter.
That's where you're going to print to.
PMPrintSettings is how
you're going to print it.
So you need to have a PMPrintSettings.
I strongly encourage anybody who ever
needs to create a PMPrintSettings
to use the print dialogue.
The print dialogue, again,
is this amazing mixture of system UI,
driver UI.
and application UI that is
incredibly hard not only to create,
but definitely to recreate
if you're outside Apple.
So if you need to print settings,
drop that print dialogue.
We're doing some API probably going
forward that will allow you to drop
the print dialogue to get print
settings without actually printing.
So it'll be more for
report-based applications that
want to have the user say,
OK, this is the way I want to print
this report whenever I print it.
So it's more for scripting
and that type of thing.
Future printing.
So please don't try.
Duplicate the print dialogues
and use the print dialogues to
get the PMPrintSettings created.
Once they're created,
you usually just use them
for the life of a PM session.
You're printing.
You get the print settings
from the dialogue.
You print.
And you get rid of them.
The print dialogue takes care of the
fact that there are presets and quick
ways for the user to switch between
different sets of PMPrintSettings.
Most applications don't need to do that.
So PMPrintSettings usually
die at the end of a print job.
But there are applications
that need to keep them.
And again,
that's these report-based applications.
So you can flatten the
PMPrintSettings to,
in Tiger, CFData or to a URL to a file.
And there are unflattened equivalents.
So you have access to both of those.
Inside the print settings,
there's lots of attributes.
Obviously, again, copies and duplex.
Can you do duplexes?
Some of the obvious ones.
We got tired of enumerating these.
And again, this is part of replacing the
old job ticket code that we had.
We now have general ways of just
querying on a print settings for a key.
So we've got this key value getting sets,
which incredibly obvious.
Should have been in the
API for a long time.
But because we were using the
job ticket mechanism as a crutch,
we never had this.
So take the crutch away,
and we learned to walk.
and it's much better.
If you want to, again,
then drop below our print
API and get down to CUPS,
you have to take our PM print settings
and turn them into a string of options,
which is what CUPS wants.
And so there's API to do that.
And again,
we're trying to facilitate for these
people who have really high-end print
needs to get from maybe our print dialog
all the way down to using the CUPS API in
the specific manner they want to.
We want you to be able
to span that gamut.
And again,
that gamut's really broader than that.
It's all the way from the
CUPS API up to the Cocoa API.
So that's how are you going to print.
PMPageFormat is how you're going
to then map onto a piece of paper.
I'm a little less pendentic about
page format than I am print settings.
Print settings,
I really want you in the print dialog.
It's just hard not to do that.
Page format,
use the page format dialog if you can.
It's what users expect.
It's a good thing.
Its task is much less daunting
than the print dialog.
So if you decide to bring some
of these formatting options into,
say,
your printing view because you're taking
this WYSIWYG idea very seriously and
you maybe want the user to select the
paper size live from inside your view,
that's great.
I actually don't have
a problem with that.
But page format's easy to drop.
It'll get you a description of your
in the page format, a PM paper,
an orientation, and the scaling.
And I say scaling for now.
Scaling is one of these
funny things that dates way,
way back, pre-OS 9, just, I mean,
really way back.
And the idea with the scaling
was that the user would,
in page setup, go and select a page,
maybe 10 inches by 10 inches,
and then say,
I want it 200%. And then the print system
would lie to the application and say,
hey, you know what,
it's really only 5 by 5, not 10 by 10.
And MacDraw, because this was really
created for MacDraw,
just to show you how old it is,
would then go, oh, it's only 5 by 5,
so I'm just going to
draw half of my content.
And the print system would go, oh,
I tricked you, and it would blow it
back up to the 10 by 10.
So it's this crazy lying to
the application to get the
application to do something
applications really can do today,
which is scale their output.
So I think over time we're
going to get rid of that.
There are better ways of handling it.
You can see them in
the Tiger print dialog,
where we have scaling onto different
paper sizes and some other features.
So scaling for now,
but hopefully it'll go away.
If you do want to not use the page setup
dialog or you want to be smarter about
finding paper sizes for your application,
you can get a list of PM papers and
find the paper you want and then
create a page format from that.
So we're going to look at that.
PM Printer Get Paper List.
Give me all the papers
for a particular printer.
Each paper has in it a
height and width and margins.
And that's it.
There's no orientation on a PM paper.
That's the distinction between
a PM paper and page format.
PM paper is actually a
physical piece of paper.
What you're going to see,
page format is that physical
piece of paper mapped,
usually via orientation,
but also today via scaling.
So you can get this paper
list for your application,
walk it, find the one you want.
You're looking for 3 by 5, for instance.
And then you can create
a page format from it,
because a page format's what the
rest of the printing API is going
to want when it comes time to print.
So you can create a page format from that
PM paper and then set the orientation.
By default, you'll get portrait,
but you can set landscape
or alternate landscape.
And so that's the way you
can pick a paper size without
going through the print dialog.
You may also actually just
know the paper size you want.
You may know that you want
this 10 by 10 piece of paper,
and you don't care if
the printer supports it.
So there's PM Paper Create,
and you can create any
paper with any margins,
any size you want, and use that.
And from that, again,
create a page format and use
the whole printing API with
that custom piece of paper.
I can't promise you what's going
to happen when you print that.
I wish I could,
but it depends on the driver.
Can the driver support
custom paper sizes?
If they do, one thing happens.
If they don't,
there's going to be cropping.
So you can get this.
You can print.
You can format to it.
But there's some question
about what's going to happen.
And again,
one of the PM printer attributes we
looked at was hasCustomPaperSize.
If it has custom paper sizes,
then you have a much better
chance of your custom paper size
actually printing correctly.
So again,
going back to the idea of taking
page format and maybe bringing
some of that into your application,
get a request a lot for how
do we do the paper menu.
And the paper menu in the page setup
dialogue is this hierarchical menu
where we try and group paper sizes
that have the same physical paper
size together into the same submenu
where only the margins are different.
So in this example, US letter,
there's US letter and going back
to the original laser writer days,
US letter small,
which has different margins.
So we group those together
for the US letter.
Well, people want to reproduce this.
So in Tiger, we have this call,
PM printer create paper
info list for menu.
It's probably our longest call, I think,
in the printing API.
But the idea is, hey,
give me back an array of PM papers.
But if I need to do
the hierarchical menu,
instead of a PM paper,
give me a subarray and
inside of that have paper.
So all you have to do
is look in this array,
walk it.
If you find a subarray,
then you're into the hierarchical menu.
If you find a PM paper,
then that's just what you're going to
want to put in your page setup pop-up.
So again,
we're trying to make this easy for
you guys to emulate pieces of the
print system where it is appropriate.
Page setup, it probably might be
appropriate depending on how
much WYSIWYG you're doing.
Print dialog, it's definitely not.
So that's PM Printer,
PM Print Settings and PM Page Setup,
PM Page Format.
Those are the three most important
pieces of the printing API.
Once you understand that,
you can do some more advanced things,
and one of the advanced things you
can do is our new Direct-- well,
not new, but the Direct Printing API.
It's new in that we have
better support for all the
MIME filters that we had before.
So this actually works pretty well now.
The idea with the Direct Printing API,
this is especially for Unix ports.
A lot of Unix applications come
over and they already know in their
code how to create PostScript output
or how to create PDF output.
And they don't want to draw
through Quartz because it's
going to be too much of a port,
or maybe they're just going to
do that in the second version.
So they've got a PostScript file
that they want to print,
and they want to give
it to the print system.
And so the Direct Printing
API lets them do exactly that.
And Preview is actually a great example,
not of a Unix port,
but a great example of
somebody who uses this.
The idea is if you're in
Safari and you hit Print and
then you hit the Preview button,
Safari draws with Quartz,
that Quartz gets captured.
It gets entered into a PDF spool file.
That PDF spool file
gets handed to Preview.
Preview opens it up,
draws that PDF spool file with Quartz,
and you look at it.
And there's a little Print button
on the bottom of that Preview.
So the idea is the user
looks at it and says,
yeah, that's what I wanted.
And you hit the Print button.
What Preview used to do at that point
was draw the PDF through Quartz,
so all the PDF was converted
back into Quartz calls,
which were spooled into the print system,
which were then spooled
back out into PDF,
spooled into the print system,
and then the print system later
on would use Quartz to do it.
So anyway,
there'd be this whole extra step
of going back from PDF to Quartz.
Forget that.
In Tiger, they just go, look,
here's the PDF file.
They use the printing API,
the direct printing API,
and it gets submitted directly
into the print system.
So if you have a Unix application
that you're porting over and
you've got a PostScript file
and you just want to print it,
the equivalent of LP,
you can use the direct printing API.
If you have a PDF file,
you can do it as well.
In fact...
You can do it with any of the
MIME types supported by those filters
we talked about oh so long ago.
PMPrinter.getMIMEtypes will let
you take a PMPrinter and say,
"Hey, what file types,
what MIME types will this print queue
accept directly?" And by directly,
that means what file types,
what MIME types can I hand it that
it has filters to convert back to
the format desired by the driver,
and it builds up that chain of filters.
So you can get this list back,
and if you find the type you want,
and PDF and PostScript are
always going to be there,
you can then use the Direct Printing API,
PMPrinter.printWithFile.
Here's the printer I want to print to.
Here's the print settings.
This is how I want to print.
Here's the page format.
It may or may not be applicable depending
on the MIME type you're printing.
Here's the MIME type.
So if you want to give
the system a hint and say,
"Hey, look, this thing's PostScript,
so we don't have to do any
auto-typing," you can do that.
You can also leave that null,
and we'll try and figure
it out as best we can.
And finally, here's the file.
So this will let you do
what the print system does.
Once we spool a PDF file,
we use the equivalent of the
Direct Printing API to submit that
PDF file into the print system.
This will let you do it yourself.
And we actually have--there's at
least one other shipping application
that uses this to great effect.
So take a look at that if
you're one of those applications
that might be useful for.
The flip side of the direct printing API,
which is, hey,
I've got a well-formed file and
I want to push it to a printer,
is this printing without a printer.
And it sounds funny,
and the guys who were proofing
my slides kept correcting this.
I really meant this.
Here,
the idea is you have an application,
and maybe your users want you
to have an export to PostScript,
for example, feature.
And you don't really want to figure out
how to convert Quartz to PostScript.
So you can use the printing
without a printer concept in
our printing APIs to implement a
PostScript export or a PDF export,
some different things.
So in order to understand how that works,
you have to understand destinations.
Every PM session has a destination,
and the destination's
broken into three parts.
There's a destination type,
a destination format,
and a destination location.
And there are APIs for getting all these.
When you get the destination type,
it's going to tell you, hey,
this user is printing to a printer,
or he's saving the file.
Or he's doing a preview,
or he's going through
the new workflow menu.
It'll tell you one of those things.
So if you're an application, for example,
that really doesn't want anybody
saving the file your content-- you're
an e-book application or something
like that-- you can find out after
the print dialog comes back up,
but before you print,
what the user has asked
the print system to do.
And destination type will tell that.
And maybe at that point, you go, hey,
I'm sorry.
It's going to cost you another
nickel to actually print this.
You can capture it and stop
the process at that point.
So that's the destination type.
Destination format.
Okay, so maybe the user hit the
save as PostScript selection.
The two files are going to be the type.
The format is going to be PostScript.
And in our print dialog today,
it's going to be PDF or
PostScript always.
It's going to be one of those two things.
We're always generating out of the
print dialog either PDF or PostScript.
So that's the destination format today.
And the location.
The location is just a URL.
And the location is pretty
obvious if you're doing,
the user is doing something
that's a save to file.
The URL is going to be where
we're going to save it.
You might want to override that.
You might want to check and make
sure it's on the proper volume.
You can do anything you
want after you get it.
It could also be the workflow menu.
Our new workflow menu,
which we call Process PDF,
that button on the left
that's really a pop-up menu,
that was the UI team.
That had nothing to do with me.
You can get that.
And you can find out that the user
is running PDF workflow on something,
and you can change the way that works.
But the important part is,
if you're trying to implement
something like export to PostScript,
you can set all those things.
So PM session,
set destination will let you set
the type and the format and the URL,
the location.
So you can say, hey,
I want to save to PostScript.
I want the output to be here.
You set this on the session,
and then you run your print loop,
and it will generate a
PostScript file for you.
User never has to see the print dialog,
and they never need to know that
the print system was even involved.
So that's printing without a printer.
That's the way you can do export.
PDF Workflow.
Again, we already talked about
the pop-up button.
This is public now in Tiger.
It's been hidden away for quite a while,
really since 10.2, I believe.
And there's a lot to be
said around here about this,
so I'm going to be saying
it in the next talk,
which is harnessing PDF.
So that'll be the talk following this.
We're going to talk about PDF Workflow
and the way you can get items in there.
So next talk, not this talk.
So in summary,
there are lots of places in the print
system for application writers and
printer driver developers to hook in.
There's filters, drivers, and back ends.
And there's just a lot of
functionality that can be
implemented there really very easily.
Writing these filters and
back ends is next to trivial,
but it adds a lot of power in the system.
And even if you're an application vendor,
you might want to look and see what
the benefits are of adding a filter
in for some of your file types.
And if you wanted to give them
to us or open source them,
that might make your file
type even more popular.
So there's ways that you
can think about there.
Print dialog extensions,
ways to get some of your
options out to the user.
If you're a printer driver developer,
that's good.
If you're an application developer,
you might want to stop and
think about those a little bit.
If you're just a Cocoa app
and you're trying to print,
use the Cocoa printing APIs.
You'll be very happy with those.
If you need to go beyond that,
we have this rich printing API.
It's worth looking at.
The header files are a little daunting,
but there's a lot of power there.
And I think with some of
these basic slides we talked,
I think you can get an idea of
exactly the way to attack it.
And then again,
we've gone to pretty good lengths,
actually, in Tiger to let you get to
the underlying CUPS API.
And once you're there,
that's open source,
so you can know exactly how that works.
And honestly, if I have my way,
more and more stuff will push
there so you guys can just go
look and see how things work.
There's not a lot of secrets in printing,
at least from our point of view.
So the more we can make
that visible to you,
the happier we're going to be.
There is a printing lab tomorrow.
Come on by.
We'll have pretty much the whole
printing team is going to be there.
So if you have questions,
it's a great place to come.
I'm not saying we'll have answers,
but if you have questions,
you should definitely go there.